---
layout: post
title: Get by with a little help from your friend
subtitle: This is for you, Ankit
tags: [personal]
comments: true
---

Hey Ankit, this is for you. 
### Q1. Compound Interest (3 pts)

Suppose that a principal of **$2000** is placed in a savings account at **15%** per annum compounded **annually**. Write a `while` loop to calculate how long it will take for the future value to become **m** (e.g., `2` or `3`) times of its initial deposit.
 
 
Your final result should be:

```
"After X years, the amount would become $XXXXX.XX"
```
Recap the formula that calculates the future value of an investment is:

\begin{align}
a & = P (1+r)^{t}
\end{align}

where:
- a = the future value of the investment/loan, including interest
- P = the principal investment amount (the initial deposit or loan amount)
- r = the annual interest rate (decimal)
- t = the number of years the money is invested or borrowed for  
In this case, we have to implement a formula to figure out how many years it will take to get double our initial deposit. We need to write a loop. Since we know only which condition we're going to stop on, we're going to use a while loop, because while loops run until a condition stops. The format of the while loop is while (some condition is true): keep going. We want to find which year we'll get at least twice our initial deposit. We want to stop when `a >= P*2`. So when `a < P*2` we want to keep going. What does keep going mean? Keep going means that we want to increment `t` and check to see if the next year will give us the money we need. The while loop will reflect that:
```python
P = 2000
r = 0.5
t = 0
a= 0
while a < P*2: 
    # if we're in the loop, then we know that a < p*2. Otherwise, we won't be here.
    t += 1 # a is still not at least P*2, so we need to wait at least another year
    a = (P*(1+r)**(t)) # how much money will we make with the new t?
    # since we changed the value of a, it will be re-evaluated by the loop. If a >= P*2, then we'll get out of the loop!
print("After {} years, the amount would be {}".format(t, round(a)))
```
We change `a` at the bottom of the loop so that the while loop stops as soon as `a >= P*2`. If we are outside of the loop, I'm guaranteed that `a >= P*2`. If that wasn't true, then I'd still be in the loop! Right after that, we will print out `t` and `a`, because we know that they are the ones we need.  
### Q2. A `while` Loop Implementation of `divmod()` (3 pts)

Many programming languages implemented a function called `divmod()` (short for division and modulus), which returns both the quotient and the remainder when dividing two **positive** numbers using floor division.

The relationship among the 4 numbers can be described by the following formula:

\begin{align}
dividend & = quotient \times divisor + remainder
\end{align}

Define two variables `dividend` and `divisor` by yourself, and write a `while` loop to find the corresponding `quotient` and `remainder` **without** using `/`, `*`, `//`, `%`, and `divmod()`.  
The answer here isn't as clear as the previous one. We need to use a while loop and we're not allowed to use anything that would be helpful for division. We have two of the numbers, so first we need to identify what's missing. We have the dividend, and the divisor. So we're missing the quotient and the remainder. The idea here is to realize what the equation is doing. The equation is `dividend = quotient * divisor + remainder`. We can't use `*`, but we can use `+`. I'm noticing here that if I had `quotient == 3` and `divisor == 2`, then it's the same as saying `2 + 2 + 2`. I'm adding up the `divisor` `quotient` number of times. This is pretty obvious, but I'm going to use this relationship to build my `while` loop.  

Here is my approach. I'm going to use addition to imitate multiplication. I'm going to add the the `divisor` to itself `quotient` number of times. Eventually, it will be equal to `dividend` or it will be greater than `dividend`. I don't know the quotient, so I'm going to keep adding the `divisor` to itself, keeping track of how many times I am adding it, until it is equal to at least the `dividend`. The number of times I add `divisor` to itself is the quotient, isn't it? Let's test out this idea on an example.  Let's  say `divisor == 2` and `dividend == 6`. I'll define something else called `product` which represents the `quotient * divisor`. Since I don't know `quotient` and I can't use `*`, I'll be using addition as described above. Below is the code:
```python
dividend = 6
divisor = 2
product = 0
while product < dividend:
    product += divisor # add more to the product since we haven't reached the dividend yet.
    quotient += 1 # this is the number of times I've added divisor to itself
```
If you run this code, you'll realize that you will run the loop (which increments `quotient`) 3 total times, since product is first 0, then 2, then 4, then 6. Then, `quotient == 3`, which is correct! However, this doesn't work to find the remainder, since in this case remainder is 0, and does not compute finding the divisor if there is a remainder. Let's talk about that next.  
Finding the divisor if the two number divide cleanly is easy. But what if they don't? Let's say `divisor == 6` and `dividend == 15`. 15 does not divide into 6, so there is a remainder. However, if I run the above loop on these values, I will get `quotient == 3` since `6 + 6 + 6 == 18` and `18 > 15`, but in this case, my quotient should actually be 2 and my remainder should be 3 since it needs to fit into the equation `dividend = quotient * divisor + remainder`. How can I calculate `remainder`? Well, it's easy! If the divisor does not cleanly divide the dividend, then the loop will only stop once the product is larger than the dividend. That means that the remainder is as simple as `product - dividend`! It will add one too many times, since it doesn't divide cleanly. The amount that it goes over the dividend is the remainder. Test this out for yourself on a few values if you don't believe me! If the product is greater than the dividend, then the divisor does not divide the dividend cleanly and we need to change the remainder. If the product is equal to the dividend, then that means the divisor does divide the dividend cleanly, so the remainder is 0. So now we add the following lines to the loop:
```python
dividend = 6
divisor = 2
product = 0
while product < dividend:
    product += divisor # add more to the product since we haven't reached the dividend yet.
    quotient += 1 # this is the number of times I've added divisor to itself

remainder = 0
if product > dividend:
    remainder = product - dividend
```
Great! However, in the same example where `divisor == 6` and `dividend == 15`, we get `remainder == 3` and `quotient == 3`, which is wrong since quotient needs to be 2 for it to work in `dividend = quotient * divisor + remainder`. Since we know that if `product > dividend`, then we've added one too many times, we simple decrease quotient by 1 in this case, since we know that we made it go over the dividend. This will get us to the correct quotient that fits into that equation. The finished loop reads:
```python
dividend = 6
divisor = 2
product = 0
while product < dividend:
    product += divisor # add more to the product since we haven't reached the dividend yet.
    quotient += 1 # this is the number of times I've added divisor to itself

remainder = 0
if product > dividend:
    remainder = product - dividend
    quotient -= 1
```
